In 2024, over 26,000 crores worth of health
insurance claims were rejected by insurers.
But why?
Well, because this is the policy copy
you get when you buy a health insurance.
And if you look at it carefully, you'll find 9 hidden
clauses that make sure the insurer is not paying your bill.
I even have an awful meter over here
to find out how bad they actually are.
So we'll start with the first
one which is the sub limit.
So let's say that you bought this policy and this
policy says that your Sum assured is 10 lakh rupees.
Which means that if you get admitted to a hospital
and you get a bill of up to 10 lakh rupees
the insurance provider will cover it for you.
And if it crosses 10 lakhs then
you pay it from your pocket.
So let's imagine you get admitted to a hospital and the
treatment for a particular disease costs like 5 lakhs.
But you have a sum insured
of 10 lakhs. So you're safe, right?
Wrong.
In this case they would actually pay only 2
lakhs and not the 5, you would pay the rest.
And the reason reason is because of sub limit.
If you look over here you'll notice that this
particular disease has a sub limit of 2 lakh rupees.
Which means they won't
pay you more than this.
So what you have to learn from this, is if you find a health
insurance that's really cheap and has a great sum assured.
And you think damn, I've gotta
buy it because it's too cheap.
Maybe, it has a sub limit that
should not exist over there.
This gets a 3 on 10 on the awful meter.
And it gets a 3 on 10 because
if you miss the next clause,
even if you don't have sub limits, the insurer
could refuse to pay up to 50% of your bill.
And when I was looking for it I actually
couldn't find it because it's sneaky.
It's right here under room modifier.
And over here it says room rent capping.
Yeah, so room rent capping is probably one of the
most misunderstood clauses in an insurance contract.
This is Shrehith.
I first discovered him on his
amazing writing on Finshots.
He also knows a lot about insurance
because he's the co founder of Ditto.
Okay, so the way this works is room rent clauses
are sort of explicitly mentioned in different ways.
So either you will see something like
1% of your sum insured is set aside for room rent payouts.
Or you will see something like
hey listen, you can pick a room, anything you want, so long
as it's a single private AC room
and in both cases, irrespective of how it
is worded, it is essentially a restriction.
Now I know this may not seem like a
big deal but here is where you are wrong.
Imagine the limit is 5000 rupees.
And that single AC room is not available.
But a deluxe room is available
which is ten thousand rupees.
So you think I'll be there for three nights.
Ten thousand.
That's thirty thousand.
The insurer said he has
a limit of five thousand.
So they'll pay five thousand
total thirty thousand.
You will actually only pay fifteen
and the insurer pay fifteen.
Right?
Right.
Absolutely wrong.
The amount you have
to pay will be 1.5 lakhs.
And the insurer will pay another
1.5 lakhs for the total bill to be 3 lakhs.
Let me explain.
It's called proportionate
deduction and it's freaking crazy.
Imagine this.
You have a limit
of 5,000 rupees for a room.
Everything else that you spend so say on surgery,
medicines, consultation etc will come to whatever bill.
As long as it's within your sum
assured, the insurer will cover it.
But let's change one thing here.
Instead of getting a 5000 room for whatever
reason you get a 10,000 rupee room.
And all these things still exist.
What you just did was get
yourself a better room.
But you just agreed to pay 50% of the bill.
You see, the difference between
these room rents is 50%.
So the insurer says I will proportionately
deduct 50% from everything.
Which means if this total bill over here
is 3 lakh rupees, he will say, it was 50%.
50%.
You pay 1.5 lakhs,
I'll pay 1.5 lakhs.
The point is this.
There should be no room rent capping
when you get an insurance. This gets
an awful clause rating of a 4 out of 10.
So take a look at this over here.
It's called the no claim bonus.
And if you look at the no claim
bonus, it'll say no claim bonus.
A no claim bonus of 20% of the sum assured
for each completed and continuous policy year.
This is really cool for a bunch of reasons.
So let's suppose your sum assured is 10 lakh rupees
and there's a 20% over here that is a no claim bonus.
So if you don't claim
anything, it becomes 12 lakhs.
Then the year after that if there's no claim,
14 lakhs and then 16 lakhs and 18 lakhs.
And then 20 lakhs, you get the point.
But here's the problem with it.
If you get the no claim bonus and your room rent is
capped at 1%, it does not automatically mean that it will
now be calculated as 1% of your new
sum assured with the no claim bonus added.
Instead, the actual room rent restriction of 1%
is calculated based on the actual sum assured.
So bonus is not counted.
And then we also have this little
thing here called the restoration benefit.
Now this is sold as
this glorious thing.
So let's suppose you have 10 lakh rupees as your sum assured
and you spend all of it within that period of your policy.
And this restoration benefit will basically fill that up
and bring it back to 10 lakh rupees for you to use again.
Sounds good, right?
But it's actually not.
Because sometimes these guys do not allow the
restoration amount to be reused for the same disease.
I give this clause an easy 4 on 10 on the awful
meter because this is actually pretty bad.
But wait till you hear the next one.
Co payment.
Now notice this co payment
thing is expressed in a percentage
and co payment is exactly
what it sounds like, you co-pay.
So over here it says 20%.
This basically means if it's a 1 lakh
rupee bill, you co-pay and you pay 20% of it
and in return the insurance costs
a few thousand rupees less.
But there's also another version of the same
idea that features in many policies these days.
It's called a deductible.
In most cases what the insurance companies will tell you
is hey, instead of paying sort of a percentage value,
you pay something every time you have to
make a claim and then whatever comes after.
So the bill is 5 lakhs and
the deductible is set at 2 lakhs.
You pay the 2 lakhs and the remaining 3
lakhs is paid out by the insurance company.
You're buying a health insurance just so you
don't have to worry about the hospital bill.
Simple solution, avoid
co payment clause.
So I give this a simple 5 out of 10
on the awful clause meter.
But wait till you hear
about zonal co payments.
So if you open your sort of policy
terms and conditions, you may see that
insurance companies will have
something like zone wise payment structure.
So they'll say people in zone one will pay a certain
premium, people in zone 2 will pay certain kind of premiums
and people in Zone 3 may
pay different kinds of premiums.
And the reason why this happens is because insurance
companies can then use differential pricing
to target people in different cities.
So for Instance, if you're living in a city where
medical expenses are way below the national average,
then automatically insurance companies can
come and say we offer you a lower premium
simply because we don't have to
pay as much to the hospitals there.
However, the challenge happens when somebody
buys the policy claiming that they're in a tier
3 city and then consistently
make claims in tier 1 cities.
Then the insurance companies can come and say that look,
we mandate you to pay a portion of the bill yourself.
So simple solution, avoid zonal co payments.
Okay, this one is really important.
The waiting period. The one
The one that you should first know about is
the initial waiting period which is 30 days.
Which means as soon as you buy your health insurance
for the first 30 days you aren't covered for anything.
You just have to wait.
And sometimes some spirit specific diseases
aren't covered for an X number of years.
In this case over
here is three years.
So make sure this is
as low as possible.
But every health insurance
policy has this.
So let's take a hypothetical example.
Let's suppose you have a blood pressure problem and you tell
the health insurance people that yeah, I have a blood pressure
issue and for some reason you have
a heart attack one year after you buy it.
If they can connect your heart attack with the
blood pressure which is a pre existing disease,
they basically won't give you the claim.
Basically this means you should buy the health
insurance when you're fit, not when you're sick.
But this gets a 6 on 10
on the awful clause meter.
This one's really cool actually.
And it's called the top up.
This is sold like any
Internet recharge.
You have a limit of 100 GB.
Want to get another 50 GB top up,
scratch this card and pay 50 rupees.
I know, I know we don't have
scratch cards anymore.
But the same logic is for
health insurance as well.
You have 10 lakh rupees.
Sum assured, you can get a top up of another 10
lakh rupees bringing your grand total to 20 lakhs.
But this has a big problem.
Let's say your top up has
a deductible of 10 lakh rupees.
It means the top up will only get activated
once the medical bill crosses 10 lakhs.
Now say you get hospitalized
and the bill is 10 lakhs.
This amount will be paid
by your sum insured.
But now,
let's say you get hospitalized again
and this time the bill is 5 lakh rupees.
Now even though you have a 10 lakh rupee top
up, that is useless because the top up only gets
activated if the medical bill crosses 10 lakhs.
So you will have to pay
all the bill by yourself.
So this clause gets a 7
on 10 on the awful meter.
So what should you actually get?
You should get the super top up.
So instead of you having to pay the deductible
over and over again every time you make a claim,
all you have to do is pay the deductible once and the
insurance company will pay out the remaining expenses.
And so you don't have to worry about paying
the deductible every time you make a claim.
And then we have daycare.
So if I look at this over here, we can
see daycare procedures and treatments.
Over here it says all procedures
are covered up to annual sum insured.
Basically it means if you have to get hospitalized,
but it's not 24 hours, it's something that
you're in a procedure for a few hours or
basically in daycare less than 24 hours.
This could be say cataract or
dialysis or tons of other things.
Then does the insurer actually
cover it or not?
Because these are valid procedures that are affecting
your health and the insurance must cover it.
But some of them don't.
Why?
Because they had a clause over here that says
you must be hospitalized for at least 24 hours
before you cover it, which basically means that
the health insurer is not covering daycare.
Not covering this
would be very sneaky.
And I would give that clause a easy
7 on 10 on the awful clause meter.
And now we have
cashless and reimbursement.
But what is it?
A few years back, what would generally happen is insurance
companies would automatically force you to pay the bill yourself.
So first you pay the hospital, then you wait for a
few weeks, and then the insurance company eventually
says, I'll pay out that money to you
because you paid the hospital.
Now, unfortunately, this isn't very easy for the customer,
especially when they're dealing with a medical crisis.
So nowadays most insurance companies offer you a cashless benefit,
which basically means that you don't have to collate
all the bills, the medical documents, none of that.
Instead the hospital
will do it for you.
They'll send it to the insurance companies, they'll get approval
and then the insurance company will pay the hospital directly.
So you don't have to pay
anything out of pocket.
But imagine you have an accident and they take you to the nearest
hospital, and over there, that hospital is not a network partner.
Therefore you can't use this and you
have to foot the bill yourself.
Why would you do that?
I'll give this an 8 on 10
on the awful clause meter.
And the most evil clause
is right over here.
It's.
I can't even spot it.
It's that small.
There's a star over here.
And if you see the end, it says
reasonable and necessary.
Here's what it means.
So unfortunately in India we don't have
something called as a standard rate card.
Affectively because every hospital choose what they
believe is a fair price for a certain treatment.
So hospital can overcharge.
And an insurance company may have no
other recourse except to pay up.
So what insurance companies do is within their
terms & conditions, they have a standard clause.
They say, look, we only pay for costs that
are deemed customary and reasonable.
Reasonable means the cost
must be deemed reasonable.
If you have injury to your shoulder or
you need surgery to the shoulder.
It can't be that.
The treatment and the surgery cost add upto 25 lakhs. Anywhere
across India you'll probably end up paying 2-3 lakhs.
Anything beyond that sum may be
completely unreasonable.
Right?
So we will only pay for costs
that are deemed reasonable.
What a customary is.
So let's suppose the hospital decides to add a bunch of ancillary
charges that have no relation to the actual treatment, right?
So the insurance companies will
always ask do doctors administer this?
Do they do this?
Is this the treatment protocol?
So they look at that and then if the charges are not
deemed customary, then insurance companies can also say,
hey look, we are not going to pay out.
Now who decides what is
reasonable & customary?
Unfortunately, the way it works is insurance
companies generally decide what is reasonable
in customary and most customers have no recourse.
One minute you are saying, if I broke
my leg and I'm admitted at the hospital.
I need to go and check their rate card with other
people to find out if it's reasonable or necessary.
I'll say reduce ₹500 because my
insurer won't give me the payment.
And just because of this, I'll call this a 10
on 10 on the awful no on the evil scorecard.
But the question is, how
can you safeguard yourself?
Well, here are three things that you
should know to protect yourself.
Pause this video to read them.